Creating and managing signature keys with GPG
Comment those subkeys
2020-03-22



= Creating and managing signature keys with GPG =

	These are my notes on gpg signature management. gpg has
	changed a lot since I last did this, and I've decided to use a
	new strategy - might as well write it down while at it.

github, linux packages and repositories, email... a cryptographic
digital signature can be used in several places to
provide //authenticity// - a reasonable proof that the artifact was
indeed generate by the sender.



== Basics of public key infrastructure (PKI) ==

In broad strokes, a digital signature works in the context of the
following workflow:
- The author generated in the past a linked pair of keys: a public key
  and a private key. The are blobs of data, with the mathematical
  property that whatever is encripted with the private key can only be
  decrypted with the matching public key.
- The author sends away the public key, registers it on services, etc.
- To sign an artifact, the author calculates its hash, encrypts this
  hash with the secret key, and attaches the hash to the artifact.
  The encrypted hash is the digital signature.
- To check the signature, a recipient calculates the artifact's hash
  the same way the author did, and decrypts the received hash using
  the author's well-known public key. The match between the calculated
  and decrypted hashes mean two things:
  - That the artifact was not tampered
  - And that the decrypted hash was encrypted with the secret key that
    corresponds to the public key used to decrypt it.


The [wikipedia page https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_signature]
has more details.



== The strategy ==

Using gpg to generate a pair of cryptographic keys for digital
signatures is quite trivial. That's not what we are going to do.

Our strategy, instead, is to generate a //master// key pair that we
then use to generate several signature subkey pairs that we can then
use in different hosts and for different services. After generating
the keys, we put the master key away, and leave installed in each host
only the relevant secret keys. This has some advatanges:
- Minimizes the exposure of the master key, as it's not used on a
  daily basis and is not permanently installed in any host.
- Limits what an attacker can do with a secret key that gets
  compromised - the secret key and the embedded information can't be
  changed without the master key.

  In contrast, a compromised top-level key can be altered by itself.
- When a host is compromised, you know exactly which keys are
  compromised and have to be revoked, and which services have to be
  updated, because that's documented in the keys themselves.


Keep in mind that all these points depend on the security of the
master key.



== Configuring gpg ==

It's worth noting that the ages-old interface design of gpg doesn't
support this approach in an intuitive way. The first thing we should
do is add a couple of lines to //~/.gnupg/gpg.conf//:

```
utf8-strings
keyid-format short
with-fingerprint
with-sig-list
list-options show-notations
```

These options make gpg show more information about the subkeys,
information we are going to set and use.



== Detour: creating an encrypted flash drive ==

Part of our strategy involves keeping the master key secure. One way
of doing that is by keeping it in a flash drive that is physically
kept secure. We could create and work with it locally and then move it
away, but we are instead going to work with it straight from an
encrypted flash drive. It's worth noting that the encryption here is
serving more to hide what is actually in the drive (steganography)
than to make the key more secure, as the key itself is already
encrypted with a password.

After inserting the flash drive, figure out where it is
with //lsblk//, set the environment variable //DEV// and use the
following commands:

```
DEV=/dev/sdb
sudo cryptsetup luksOpen "$DEV" cryptdev
> Enter passphrase for /dev/sdb:
sudo mkfs.ext4 /dev/mapper/cryptdev
> mke2fs 1.45.6 (20-Mar-2020)
> Creating filesystem with 1950080 4k blocks and 487680 inodes
> Filesystem UUID: e1a5329c-24ee-4422-a193-b8e77d0b317f
> Superblock backups stored on blocks:
>            32768, 98304, 163840, 229376, 294912, 819200, 884736, 1605632
>
> Allocating group tables: done
> Writing inode tables: done
> Creating journal (16384 blocks): done
> Writing superblocks and filesystem accounting information: done
sudo cryptsetup luksClose cryptdev
```



=== Using the encrypted drive ===

Once again, figure out the device with //lsblk// and assign it to DEV:

```
DEV=/dev/sdb
sudo cryptsetup luksOpen "$DEV" cryptdev
> Enter passphrase for /dev/sdb:
sudo mkdir -p cryptdir
sudo mount -t auto /dev/mapper/cryptdev cryptdir
```

Don't forget to ``umount`` and ``luksClose`` the device after we are done:

```
sudo umount cryptdir
sudo cryptsetup luksClose cryptdev
```



=== Alternatives ===

Note that this encrypts the whole drive for data, getting rid of the
partition table. You can also partition the drive and encrypt a
partition with the same commands, just changing the device.

Another alternative is to encrypt just a file inside the partition,
more details [here $cwd$/../luksfile/index.html]. Just remeber that
hiding the data is the intent, so don't name the file something
like ``my-gpg-master-key.ext4.luks``.

You can also forego the hidding and use a regular filesystem in a
flash drive partition.



== Creating the master key ==

Before creating the master key, we are going to copy //~/.gnupg//
directory to the physically detachable drive and use ``GNUPGHOME``



== References ==

- Why expiration dates are irrelevant:
  https://security.stackexchange.com/questions/14718/does-openpgp-key-expiration-add-to-security/
- Ana Guerrero López tutorial that uses subkeys:
  http://ekaia.org/blog/2009/05/10/creating-new-gpgkey/
- Generating a revocation certificate with gpg:
  https://debian-administration.org/article/450/Generating_a_revocation_certificate_with_gpg
- Getting information from an armored gpg public key file:
  https://superuser.com/questions/173417/getting-information-from-an-armored-gpg-public-key-file
